
(May 7 2026)

---

This the first day of my "writing my own os in rust" journey.
I decided to name my os "rusty_os". Hopefully, This will be fun and full of knowledge, learning journey.

I search at google for writing an OS in Rust. And i came up to this website https://os.phil-opp.com/freestanding-rust-binary/ which teaches you to write os in rust from scratch.
Upon reading this blog, I learned so many things on the first day.

I basically know rust language and it's features like iterators, closures, pattern matching, options and results and also ownership model.

I first created new bin project "rusty_os".
I learned why edition and semantic version matters.
Also #![no_std] macro which is important for creating a bare metal os.

### Panic implementation

As i going further, I came upon a topic panic implementation.
Which we need to implement when a panic occurs. Normally std library provides this implementation.
I also noticed there is function called diverging function which has "never" return type !. It's important later as we learn because the start point function should not return anything.

Then I came upon a really nice topic rust_eh_personality for stack unwinding.
Basically Rust handles exception in two phases: 
1. a search phase 
2. a cleanup phase

In search phase: the unwinder searches for catch block. 
1. Stack walking: The unwinder starts at the top of the stack ( the function that panicked ) and examines each stack frame one by one.
2. Personality Routine: For each frame, it calls a special function called the "personality routine" (Rust's is rust_eh_personality).
3. The Decision: the personality routine checks if the current function has a catch block capable of handling the panic.

In cleanup phase: Once the target handler is found, the second phase begins. The unwinder  starts from the top of the stack again, but this time it has a different mission: " Run all the necessary destructors fro variables that are going out of scope". This phase is critical for Rust's memory safety, ensuing no resources are leaked.

1. Stack Walking(again): The unwinder walks the stack from top to bottom, again calling the personality routine for each frame.
2. The landing pad: For a function that has local variables with destructors, the personality routine identifies the "landing pad". This is special function generated by the compiler.
3. Running Cleanup: The personality routine transfers control to the landing pad. The landing pad executes the destructors for all variables that were alive in the function at the point the panic occured.
4. Resuming unwind: After the cleanup for that frame is finished, the landing pad hands control back to the unwinder. The unwinder then moves to the next frame.
5. Stop: This process repeats until the unwinder reaches the handler frame identified in Phase 1. At this point, unwinding stops, and the personality routine finally transfers control to the actual catch block, where your program can handle the error.

Unwinding is a complicated process and requires some OS-specific libraries(e.g. libunwind on linux).

Therefore, I disabled unwinding in Cargo.toml file.

### Start Attribute

Then, I stumbled on this _start function or #[start] language item.

The rust main function is assigned the #[lang = "main"] item, not #[start]. These two are completely different.
I was wondering why this separation, then I learned the reason behind it.
This separation allows Rust to:
- Initialize global state before main runs (allocators, panic handlers)
- Set up OS-specific plumbing (argv/envp handling)
- Provide consistent exit codes via the Termination trait.
- Support no_std environments where you might want to skip this initialization. (which we want :) )


### Overwriting the entry point

So I custom start function which overwrites the operating system entry point with our own.
Also I used #[unsafe(no_mange)] attribute to disable name mangling which rust compiler does, so that our function starts with _start.

Also I have marked the function as extern "C" to tell the compiler that is should use the C calling convention for this function.

### Linker Errors

This is the part where I was most interested. The linker is a program that combines the generated code into an executable.
Since the executable format differs between Linux, Windows, and macOS, each system has its own linker that throws a different error.

So to solve the errors, I need to tell the linker that is should not include the C runtime.
And we can do this either by passing a certain set of arguments to the linker or by building for a bare metal target.

I tried both methods and it worked.

### Target Triple 

Also I looked up on a topic "target triple" which is used to describe the different environments.
A target triple tells the compiler: "What system will this code run on?", it's like giving the compiler an address to deliver working code.

The format is : arch-sub-vendor-sys-env
But in practice, it's usually: <arch>-<vendor>-<os>-<abi> 

This was interesting to learn because I used to see a lot of this format like x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu but never really knew what does that mean. Now I know exactly what that means.

Breaking down each part:

arch - Architecture ( The CPU type)
sub - Sub-architecture ( CPU variant )
vendor - Who made it? 
sys - Operating system 
env - Environment/ABI ( The calling convention )


Example of bare metal environment is the thumbv7em-none-eabihf target triple, which describes and embedded ARM system.

I first downloaded with command:
rustup target add thumbv7em-none-eabihf

Then build my freestanding executable for this target:
cargo build --target thumbv7em-none-eabihf


And there was one problem, not problem really.
rust-analyzer was raising error saying "found duplicate lang item`panic-impl`".
The reason for this error is that rust-analyzer by default, which also tries to build the binary in test and benchmark mode.

The proper way to avoid this error is to specify in our Cargo.toml that our binary does not support building in test and bench modes.


And that's it for Day 1.
I learned so much today and hope to learn more.